Someone like to move the minutes.
The last one was, last meeting
we held was true and accurate.
Record hold.
Why are we hearing from the office, the auditor general?
This, this should be short.
Very good.
Very good. Thanks.
Uh, could we call on, uh, Mark Evans, Sarah Gray
and Ana Olson?
Right. We're in your hands, please. Uh, mark start. Great.
Thank you. Good afternoon. Um, so if you had a short, um,
submission from us, we'd just like to, uh, start out
by saying that the 2023 standing orders, um,
they're highly supportive of.
We've had really good, we've got good feedback from, um,
those organizations that went through the system
and about how much better
and more focused the inquiry was
around their key bits of operations.
So it's positive thing.
We, we've noted that, um, obviously the amount of time
to the scrutiny function
of parliament is there's dramatically increased.
Um, so our submission really focuses on
where the implementation of those 23
changes can be further enhanced.
And so you see, we go through a few key areas
and we're happy to talk about those
with Officer Clark down the track
as well in terms of the detail.
But scrutiny weeks in particular, you know,
we've got one coming up in December, I think at the moment,
we're doing about a 95 briefings in that week.
Um, and I I, you know, without speaking for committees,
we noticed a little bit of scrutiny, fatigue by the,
by the end of, of such a week.
Um, and many of you'll remember that
before scrutiny weeks, uh,
under the previous standing orders, we had departments, um,
reviewed by and large
before Christmas, some large crown entities,
and then the, the rest
of the Crown entities done after Christmas.
So things were spaced out.
So there's a lot of advantages to scrutiny weeks,
and we acknowledge that,
but as we, we just wonder if the scheduling can be that, uh,
a bit more targeted where use of, uh,
instruments like defacto, um, proforma, um,
briefings could be used for those entities
where there's low risk
and the efforts targeted more to those larger, um, uh,
entities so that the scheduling can, you know, get the kind
of in-depth scrutiny that, that, um, I know everybody's
after from those standing orders changes in 23.
So, yeah. We've, our brief mentions in there, you know,
a couple of suggestions we think could be done around
how scrutiny week is scheduled to take,
um, to get better scrutiny.
How would you differentiate between, um, um,
something that should be more substantially dealt with,
something that might be more profile?
Yeah, we try to get away from it by, by going to scrutiny.
But yeah, I, I think the, uh, the scrutiny plans that, that,
uh, committees have, um, already got in place
and have implemented with some scrutiny priorities in there.
So they're driven by committees themselves around,
historically for these entities,
we've been really interested in
how they've done on the particular issues
that they, or purpose they have.
It could be size of entity, just sheer revenue expenditure
question, but match to the scrutiny plans.
Um, and I think some of the, the small entities
that are peripheral to those priorities could be done on a,
you know, once a parliamentary term basis rather than
squeezed into a, a very hectic schedule
and scrutiny week for, for example,
Oh, you, you go first.
Oh, You want me to, oh, so yeah,
that was gonna be my quick question.
Um, 'cause obviously the committees I'm involved in, we,
we did, we've actually done a scrutiny plan
for the whole three years.
Yes. Is it, is it, are you saying that's a bit
of inconsistency across select committees doing that?
Or, um, and,
and has your office got enough oversight into those
or, um, communication around those scrutiny plans or,
So we work as, you know, closely
with Office of the clerk Yeah.
To, to assist and advise.
But, you know, ultimately it's the committee's decision to
how they want to, you know, conduct scrutiny.
But I know the 2023 review
did talk about scrutiny over a parliamentary team.
Yes. And I think the idea of that was so that, um, as,
as the, the chair was just pointing out
that it could be zeroed in around scrutiny priorities,
but we've ended up with a bit of a hybrid here
where we're trying to do all entities
that are annual reviewable in the one week
where there's some tools that within those changes
that would enable, you know, fewer of them to be done.
Uh, and there are other mechanisms like
review briefings that's we've got, yeah.
Um, that could be used more. Okay. Yeah.
The things seem to be consist issue.
Yeah. I've just got two quick questions, Mr. Chair.
Um, the first one is, um, in your submission, you noted on,
uh, scrutiny week that the practice of having most
of annual review and estimates hearing on scrutiny week, um,
impacted members' capacity to fully attend.
So my first question was just, um,
what was the basis of that?
And I guess, have you actually noted
that members are not able to attend hearings as a result
Of that?
I think it was, uh, we didn't, you know,
keep a attendance record or anything like that.
So, um, I think the main thing we noticed was that
by the end there were, um, there were competing priorities
that, that the lines
and follow up questions were, were fewer.
Um, the engagement had dropped off those kind
of really anecdotal type observations.
And, and in the end, committees themselves would have to,
would be best to test that with.
If, if, if that's not the case,
then we'd be happy to concede that point.
Yeah. And currently standing orders, um, uh,
require scrutiny week to be used predominantly for scrutiny,
but not exclusively for scrutiny, which means
that time could be used for other matters.
Um, do you have a view as to whether scrutiny weeks should
be used exclusively
and on exclusively for issues of scrutiny
to accommodate the use of more time
during those days for those issues?
Uh, uh, um, not really.
I think we'd, we'd say we'd like to see scrutiny done well,
uh, carefully around the key performance matters
of the entities in question.
You know, in the end, it's up to the, uh,
committees themselves to do the scheduling
and consultation with, with their colleagues and, and parks.
Okay. Um, could I just, uh,
move on to the review briefings?
We review briefings are a little bit
confusing was our observation.
Uh, and again, variously used by different committees.
Uh, we found that review briefings, you know,
we've still got two to do, um, coming in from last year
that are scheduled.
Um, for example, they are now, the audit information
that is attached to those is, you know, 10 months old.
Um, and we felt like it could be clarified in there.
So that's a small procedural, uh, suggestion in there that
that could actually connect to what we're saying earlier.
There's an opportunity to say, let's do a review briefing
for the, the, the term, uh, for this,
this particular entity, uh, that we could cover in a, in a,
in a summary of audit findings over the last three years
or for this particular financial year.
But we just found, like, um,
they were not being used systematically or,
or perhaps to enable the, the intention
of the, uh, original changes.
And one last point, Mr.
Chairman committee was around the activity activity reports,
um, fantastic.
Bringing together of, of what was found through the,
through the, um, scrutiny term of of year.
Um, I think there's an opportunity maybe for the,
in this final year
before the, uh, uh, go the next election
for the incoming select committees to now pick up the areas
of interest to the previous committees in terms
of scrutiny priorities and plans and,
and what those activity reports might say.
We noticed there was varying areas of focus in some
of those activities reports,
but yeah, I think w we also noticed, uh, regardless of
who it is, uh, that the new mps often have
to pick up from the start, from scratch.
Um, but yet, you know, of course we're always here, we,
we noticed this, what the, the continuing themes
you'd say in a, in a financial review of any given entity.
And if the previous, the outgoing committee was able to,
you know, pass the baton to,
to the incoming one would see strength in that.
So maybe that be one of the emphasis.
I I think that two issues you raised me, one is the, uh,
quality of the, uh, questioning at the end of a, a process.
Um, and, uh, then that, that other issue of sort
of not even picking up some of the points that, uh,
perhaps the auditor's office might, might suggest,
should be part of a continuum of scrutiny.
Mm-hmm. And the reason we went to the weak
approach was trying to feed some of that.
Mm-hmm. Um, but it's not set in stone.
It's a, it's a, a work in progress.
It might be that we could consider perhaps having scrutiny
days as opposed to an entire week that might, uh,
help refocus that.
But, um, we obviously, uh, have a lot to do
with the auditor's office and, uh, appreciate the work.
And I think what I would've observe is that there's, uh,
a greater acceptance, not acceptance of, uh, uptake
of auditor advice in some of those, uh,
scrutiny exercises than that might have been in the past
where, you know, whatever was front views
or, uh, you know, top of the news was, uh, often
what we've got discussed.
But can we thank you very much for your time?
Sorry it's a, a brief time,
but, uh, we're obvious here in contact your office.
I really appreciate it. Thank you very much. No worries.
Thank you. Thank you.
Uh, I wonder
That Dr.
Bot might sit with me 'cause we cooperated in this
and followed him, what, half the time.
Would it be fantastic the time?
No, I don't see always.
Thank you very much for making your time available. Us.
Well, Mr. Just if you don't mind, Sue, can I just ask, uh,
if, um, Joseph Mooney would like to sit at the table?
Storm the end there. Thank you, uh, Mr.
Speaker and members of the committee, uh, thank you
for hearing, uh, me.
And I just note that in my time in the house,
I led the creation of the existing select committee system
that is now being, or may require a vision.
Uh, and, um, I think that it's interesting that it survived
as long as it has, but it does need attention now.
Uh, and in that respect, I, I just want to comment
to the committee on the submission of the park at the house,
which I have read.
It's a very extensive submission, uh, by David Wilson.
I submit to you, it's a rich submission
and provides ample scope for the committee
to make a significant improvement to the operations
of the house.
I agree strongly that improvement in law making
that is an urgent priority
because you've just heard about financial scrutiny
that has been greatly improved,
but the scrutiny of legislation remains
to be addressed in a more systematic fashion.
And in the submission I made, I listed about 19 deficiencies
that the scrutiny of legislation has in a piece I wrote in
about 2010 or something.
And none of it has been addressed.
So, uh, I I just want to say that
I particularly agree with the Clark
that efforts should be made to stop the shortening
of the legislative process.
Uh, that policy contained in bills needs to be researched
and consulted more than it is.
And that's con in the Clark's submission
and means must be found.
I submit to reduce the pressures on the subject matter,
select committees over the time the process
for those committees has degraded.
And I have found that as a regular submitter
to these committees over time, we used
to get much more time.
We're now lucky to get five minutes or 10.
That is not scrutiny, that is going through the motions.
I know there are difficult issues in how to fix that.
Uh, but there are avenues available
as the Clerk's Office has suggested,
and what I think is an excellent sufficient,
and can I say also
that the Clark's work on McGee's fundamental work is a great
work, and the Parliament is very lucky to have
that parliamentary practice book that the park has produced.
It's a tribute to the New Zealand Parliament,
and it's available online for nothing.
Uh, the three issues that seem to me
to require the most urgent attention from the committee are
a curbing on the use of urgency.
There are a number of ways that could be done.
B not dispensing with select committee scrutiny ever,
and improving select committee scrutiny in ways that are,
allow the committees to go into more depth.
Now, I know that there is one big reason
why it's very difficult to do that.
This parliament, the House of Representatives is very small.
You take the executive out of it.
The number of mps that are available for scrutiny
is quite small,
and you've got 12 subject select committees
to which legislation can go.
And the result is that you have a very uneven workload.
And, and I think measures have to be
introduced by the standing orders to allow the committees
to not hear every piece of evidence,
but to hear the ones
that the committee thinks can help 'em the most.
In, in, it's a great thing that the democratic process
of New Zealand are co uh, causes so many people
to make so many submission.
Uh, but, but they're overwhelming.
You and the mps in this country are terribly overworked
compared with internationally
because the members of parliament were set in about 1996,
and the numbers haven't been increased,
but the population has increased.
So you've got my sympathy.
It's a much harder life being an MP than it was
when I was one.
So what I want to say is that
the lack, the absence
of good technical scrutiny of legislation
is really an urgent matter,
and you really need to concentrate on that
because you'll get better law that endures longer is better
considered, and make sure
that it has public support behind it.
And neglecting select committee scrutiny is
a very unfortunate thing.
Now, of course, how Parliament works,
you could argue needed a much wider consideration, uh,
by an outside body,
but that is not something that is appropriate
until you've done your best with it.
Uh, and I think that
that department can improve its processes
and make the legislation better.
And I hope something like the report that came out
for the financial procedures could come out from this
committee about how to improve the legislative processes,
because that seems to me
to be the most urgent consideration.
And the Clark's submission really reflects that.
So I just want to say that these, uh,
these matters are of urgent importance for the health
of New Zealand's democracy.
And this select committee can provide an important
contribution to achieving useful change
to make New Zealand's democracy more authentic.
Thank you. Well, uh, thank you.
Uh, you, you raised some interesting points
that I think everyone hears grapple with,
particularly this part that is the extent
of submissions now being received
and the ease with which those submissions can be received,
uh, coupled with the expectation that, uh, if you want
to be heard, uh, then the expectation should be heard.
And but for MPS to try
and sort of defeat that, uh,
does require a lot more thought than, than just a, a,
a simple committee decision not to hear things.
But, um, uh, please ki Karen, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, sir. Jeff, appreciate that submission very much.
Uh, and noting your comments around curtailing the ability
for the house to go into urgency.
I'm keen to, uh,
go into one particular aspect,
which I think is equally important, uh,
and worthy of consideration.
And that is the ability for a government
to move an instruction to a committee, uh,
for a shortened report time
that doesn't then warrant a debate in the house.
So anything from, as you know, four months in one day,
there's no discussion.
And, uh, certainly in my relatively short time in
Parliament, I've noticed an uptake in that,
but also corresponding requests from committees seeking
extensions for the time that they need to be able to go
through the work that you've identified in your submission.
Now, in a previous standing orders committee report, it said
that such behavior should be discouraged,
as you know, that means nothing.
Yes. Uh, and I'm particularly keen on your thoughts on
how we might be able to address that as well.
Well, I'm for big constitutional change, not little,
and I would change the Constitution Act
to put restrictions on the use of urgency.
Uh, and I think that
I would also put the same restrictions on a bridging the
processes that the standing order set out
for the consideration.
How is it that a Parliament can decide
that the appropriate way to do legislation is
to have three readings of committee stage
and to do it properly
and to have the thing designed in the executive branch
before you start and consulted on.
You'd be, it would be a good idea to put exposure drafts out
so that they weren't such a mystery
to everyone when they finally appear in the house.
I won't go into that, but what I'm,
but what I'm suggesting to you is that you have the power
to make this a lot better than the public,
because I think it's a good thing for the public to be able
to make the submission.
And as Mr. Speaker is sick, it is invidious for MPS
to say you won't be heard.
But I think it would be appropriate to set up the Committee
of the Clerk and the Auditor General,
and some other officials, perhaps the Secretary for Justice,
to say that these particular submissions raise important
questions the committees should consider
for when they're considering the bill.
And all the other submissions that we receive
that are not heard will be taken into account.
And there will be a report given on them
to the select committee by the officials.
Uh, and I think that would cover it
because it, it seems to me to be a waste
of parliamentary time.
They constant repetition at the same points as you often get
with, with these select committees.
Mm-hmm. Thank you.
Uh, so just on that, if, uh,
time is is the peak Yes.
Pressure always. And I think it was, uh, I think you,
you were the, the person
who brought in the 30 week year, the sort of Yes.
Spreading it out a bit better. Yeah.
Uh, and so three days a week, 17 sitting hours during
that time, take out question time, general debate,
and you've got something like 13
and a half hours, which is not a long time
for Parliament itself to be considered legislation.
Do you think there's a case to look at, uh, longer hours
and dual activity that can go on the moment?
We don't have Parliament City Walls liquidity set
generally, no.
Uh, we can do, but not generally. Yes. Well, Mr.
Speaker, uh, what I think about that is
that the Parliament does not sit as much now in number
of hours as it used to.
Mm-hmm. And if you compare the number of hours,
and there's a, there's a, a, an appendix to my submission
that compares how Parliament sits in our,
the New Zealand Parliament sits far less in number
of hours than the House of Commons in the United Kingdom.
But the amount of legislation is probably very similar.
Uh, and, and I think the only way out of this is
to have more mps so they can, uh, are not work to death,
but can, when they sit on a subject select committee,
they're only on one that they can do their work properly
and really hold the, uh, government to account.
Because we, we sometimes forget in our, in our
unique little democracy, uh, that
we have a stripped
or racing version of the Westminster model here, uh,
we have very little accountability in a whole
lot of executive power.
And it's all always been like that.
And the upper house was abolished in 1950,
and I don't advocate bringing it back, but I do say,
and I think this opinion is becoming more prevalent in the
community now, that you will get better law if you have more
mps and they can concentrate on partic and specialize a bit.
For example, one weakness, the Bill of Rights Act, is one
of the interests that I have on previous select committees.
I've said, we should have a subject select
committee on human rights.
You can't do it.
And the reason you can't do it is,
is you can't have another subject select committee.
'cause there are not enough mps to to, to be there.
And, and that is a really grave weakness in the,
in the system where the number
of people in the community's gone up from about three
and a half million to 5 million in, in the time
that the number of mps has been the same.
So, so I think there are some bigger issues,
and you can't grapple that it's
outside the terms reference withstanding yours.
But, but nevertheless,
I think it's something you probably need to consider.
And, and as, as for urgency,
if you have a select a, a process that has been laid down
for generations about the number of readings and,
and what you are allowed to do, the first thing to say is,
we used to sit Friday mornings when I came here.
We don't now. Uh, and,
and we also used to sit Thursday nights, uh,
which we don't now.
And you cannot process in any way
that is reasonable.
The amount of legislation that is being processed now
without All Parliament time to debate it,
debate is important.
The time for debate has gone down.
We used to get 20 minutes on a second
reading, you get 10 minutes.
Now. I watched the Parliament when it was debating the, uh,
the, uh, recent changes, uh, to the voting and,
and the whole debate took an hour.
Now, that is not a democratic process, that is a shambles.
And I, I think the Parliament has
to consider its own reputation.
The parliament has been reduced in public esteem
gradually, but surely.
And for that to be a risk, the process is adopted here,
you have to be authentically democratic, and they're not
because of the strains you are under.
I, I'd like to ask you some more questions on that, but
Can we go to Ricardo just very briefly?
Um, and first of all, I agree
with your comments on the Clark submission,
but my question was in relationship
to the comments you made, um,
when it came to oral submissions.
Yes. Um, how would you mitigate
if select committees were, for example,
to hand pick submitters to hear from
that we narrow the voices of submitters to people who,
for example, have a connection to mps
or have a public profile, which may not necessarily equate
to being communities affected by a bill
or expertise necessarily.
What safeguards would you wanna, would
Suggest? I, I don't think
the officials should be, I don't think
that the committee should be doing it,
because you can't, you can't
take an MP away from what the MP believes.
But you can get expert advice from a group
of senior officials as to which, which
missions are likely to be the most use.
And parliamentary council should be part of that
because parliamentary council draft these bills.
And the drafting is often the key thing.
Uh, and, and that, that is one of the reasons why
exposure drafts should be set out.
So you get the drafting problems set, uh, decided
before it ever came into the house.
That's that not popular thing to do.
But the idea of having a bill
dreamed up in the executive branch with total secrecy
and put on an unsuspecting house with a,
with an introduction, that's not actually a good way
to conduct a public debate in a democracy.
Um,
Thank you Chair.
Um, um, I've, I've heard you talk similarly
before about capacity and capacity of MP's number.
Mm. Um, and just realizing you've just said that, um,
the house used to sit on
a Thursday evening and a Friday morning.
So I, I, I was initially thinking, well,
we can't control time, but we can increase capacity.
What would that number be in your mind,
given your experience
and your knowledge
of the system in which you had designed? Well,
Everything depends on
how much work the executive wants to give the house.
I mean, I remember coming here when the house was closed
pretty well, while the milking cows of milking was going on,
and the house would come together
after an election in about June.
I remember. Uh, and,
and, you know, things were, there wasn't
as much legislation.
There was much less.
And the community was a not as complicated as it is now.
Some of this legislation take climate change, for example,
that's a horrendously complex matter
with science and everything in it.
How the health, how can the house get that right
but only looks at it in a decry fashion?
A lot of issues are like that now.
And I've always thought
that you could have extended hearings on difficult bills
in the legislative council chamber
with an extended select committee where, uh,
when things are very difficult, when the,
when the legislation is a novel b big and very important.
And, and I just think those judgments have to be made
because, because life is getting terribly difficult
for any legislature anyway, democracy
around the world is in a state of decay and challenge.
There are fewer democracies around than the were.
And if you're not very careful, I just, uh,
put a chapter in a book internationally
that's coming out very soon about the challenges
that democracies that are under.
And that is a very unfortunate thing.
We're not anywhere near down the bad end of that,
but we'll get there if we don't do something.
Um, just on that issue of the use
of the legislative chamber effectively, that that room, uh,
for, for not necessarily an upper house,
but another place that was considered a while back.
Yes. So the compromise on
that was the extended settings that we Yes.
Now can have. But, uh, they of course,
where they were supposed to be for legislation
that was broadly supported by the house,
it's now just another vehicle.
I know. And, and that happens, doesn't it? Yeah.
But, um, I, I think, um,
the committee should probably have a, another look at all
that while we are on this particular,
I think you'd only have to do it Mr.
Speaker with, with one or two bills a year.
But it would make a big difference on high stuff of
great difficulty and public controversy.
And the hearings could be, could be televised, and it,
and it would be, it would be a super
hearing, if you see what I mean.
You'd probably have as many people on it
as the old statute division committee,
which was about 14, I think.
Uh, that was a very interesting committee
to be on when I first came
to the Parliament was labor lawyers
and National Party Farms.
And it was amazing how much common
ground you can get between.
Yeah, I, I'll just make a point that
that total time spent here in select committees
and in the houses, uh,
just over 900 hours a year is,
it's not an efficient spread of time.
Do you have any other questions for, do you, Dr.
John, uh, Dr. Boss, uh, boss,
do you wanna offer any comments?
Can I, can I, if, if that's right, Mr. Speaker.
So first of all, really want to endorse most of
what Jeffrey has said, uh,
including his points about the threats to democracy
and the fact that we are in the time when there is a
declining level
of public trust in democratic institutions, including Parliament.
And I think that makes it all the more important
that this committee do this particular review
very thoroughly and thoughtfully.
And I'm, I'm very pleased that you are clearly all engaged.
I'd like to underscore what Jeffrey said about the quality
of the, um, uh, submission from the, from the Clerk
of the House, uh, Dr. David Borson and his staff.
And I think, um, among other things this highlights
that this parliament, uh, is served by people
of very high caliber, and you should be thankful for that.
Uh, the submission obviously raises a number
of really serious issues, which this committee, you know,
in my view, must address
and make some very pertinent proposals for reform.
So, um, David, well done.
And to the others, like, um, uh, another David involved.
Um, excellent. Just three quick points from me, Mr. Speaker.
Uh, the first would be regarding the high volume
of public submissions.
Uh, here I would probably beg
to differ a little bit with, to Jeffrey.
Um, I think there is a case where you have hundreds
of thousands of submissions
for having a more selective process, in which,
as I've set out in my submission, you could have a range of,
of possibilities, um, which could be combined.
One would be mps on
that committee nominating particular submissions
for oral presentation.
You could have a random selection process
for the rest in which an X number
of submitters are given the chance to submit.
And you could have what Jeffrey has suggested, uh, uh, uh,
uh, a group of people of high caliber, uh,
recommending other, uh, submitters be
received if they haven't already been included in those two
former processes.
So I think there's ways forward, which would avoid some of
what we've witnessed in the last year
or two with vast numbers of submissions, you folk having
to sit through ever, uh, just very large numbers
of repetitive, um, presentations with very little chance
for discussion and debate.
Uh, I think that's a terrible waste
of balance time, to be honest, Mr.
Speaker, and I think you have it in your power in this
committee to do something about that.
There's two other things, just very briefly.
It's unlikely we're going to be able to increase the number
of mps anytime soon, even though I strongly think, as
with the Jeffrey, that would be desirable.
But Parliament can increase its advisory capacity, uh,
as the, uh, staff from the o office
of the Auditor General were highlighting earlier today.
Um, their capacity to contribute to parliament's process
through the scrutiny weeks,
I think has been in incredibly helpful, uh, for democracy
and for the work of mps.
But we lack some of the resources
that other parliaments around the world have.
We, we don't have a parliamentary budget office,
for example, and we don't have a parliamentary science
advisor, a chief science advisor.
Many departments have chief science advisors.
Parliament has nothing in the science area.
And there are very few scientists in Parliament.
That really worries me actually,
because so many of the issues that you folk have to grapple
with have a strong science background.
And you are often very heavily dependent on, uh,
a limited number of, um, advisors, uh, uh,
often people working for the executive.
So increasing the, the advisory capacity of Parliament,
in my view is, is really important.
I appreciate it's beyond the scope of this committee,
per se, but it's not beyond your capacity to recommend
that something being done about that.
And then the final thing just to mention is that, uh,
and I mentioned this partly
because many of the members are, are on this committee,
are are new since, since, um, The,
the clerk asked, uh, myself and, and David
and others to undertake, uh, a thorough analysis of
how Parliament could increase its, um, long-term scrutiny
of the executive, um, in the interest of better foresight,
insight, and oversight.
And, and I, along with David
and others, uh, produced a very large report back in 2019,
which was, um, reviewed by Standing Orders in 2020.
And I think, so you were a
member of the committee at the time.
Uh, it, in it, it continues to include a significant number
of recommendations, which I think, well, we weren't allowed
to call 'em recommendations, proposals, proposals, uh,
that are worth, uh, it is your, your consideration.
And so I would simply commend that to you.
Um, partly
because, uh, uh, protecting long-term interests is a vital,
uh, and critical
and ongoing responsibility
of parliaments here and around the world. Thank you. Sue,
Did you have a final question? Um, no, it's okay.
Thank you. Uh, well, uh, Lawrence, um, uh, Lawrence,
uh, is this a concise question or is it,
It It can be a very concise question, which, uh,
Sarah Jeffrey Palmer, thank you so much.
I want to check one of the things
that David Clark submitted on was the fact that while we
push a lot of both through,
but we also don't have the same mechanism like in the UK
with the upper and lower house.
So there is in some ways more executive power.
How would you then address what you said
before in terms of UK sits more than us,
But, well, the UK has two houses,
and the House of Ruin has a big influence on the, uh,
scrutiny of legislation and sometimes a lot of expertise
because there are life peers of the scientists and various,
and law lords and all sorts of things.
Uh, and, and they have a lot of people that draw.
We have less expertise in this country.
It's a small country.
Uh, and, and we have a,
a lot fewer resources than they do in their civil
service, much bigger.
Uh, and you can get a lot more outta it.
So, uh, what I, uh,
and I spent two weeks when I was a Deputy Lee,
the opposition watching the House of Commons.
And the interesting thing about the House
of Commons is there's not enough room to have a caucus.
So they don't caucus.
And, and, and what they do is the mps from both parties
ask as many difficult questions of the civil servants,
regardless of what party there on that is scrutiny
that we don't have, we have corpus control.
And that's an anti invention coming
here from Australia.
And there's a question as
to whether it is the best way to proceed.
Thank you. It's not,
uh, well, gentlemen, thank you very much.
Can I just, that document that you've just, uh, uh,
reference from the 2019 Yes.
A vague, vague memory of it. So I might ask.
It's a door stop really.
Well, I've asked about to circulate to members
of the committee, so we have a bit of a look at it.
Again, thank you. Thank you very, thank you very much.
Thank you. Members committee. And Mr. Speaker, you
No haven't. Thank you.
It's pretty big.
It's fine, but it's with
and nosy. I'm alright for now.
Full on, uh, Caitlin Consulting, John Pat, Kent,
Lin, Kenton.
Sorry. My apologies.
Thank you. A speaker. Thank you.
Somewhat intimidated after those prior presentations
up, so That's right.
So always. Yeah. Yeah.
Um, I'm not sure why you've asked me in some ways
'cause I, I suspect maybe you haven't had
that many submissions to consider,
and I probably will go against my own advice on when you,
what submitted should do.
But probably two things that I've, I've tried to focus one,
I've been a ate submitter on lots of tax bills
and more recently assisted the Finance expenditure committee
on last year's, uh, emergency tax bill,
and currently doing the same with the,
the current annual rates bill.
Um, so, and I've seen it on both sides.
When I worked from, uh, looking at the bill
and looking through the process, trying to understand it,
one of the questions I had was,
what happens if Parliament doesn't pass the annual rates
bill in time as required by the Income Tax Act?
And that bill, it will happen every time
because the confidence and supply will make sure it happens.
But it's, one of the questions is
why are we doing that annually?
What does that process about What happens if it doesn't?
And then trying to pick up what submitters are saying,
often you will get a submission saying, cut the rates,
increase the personal tax rate,
or you will get other submissions saying
we should have a capital gains tax,
or we should increase the tax rates.
Both of those miss the fundamental purpose of the tax bill,
which is to fund government's expenditure.
And by the time the annual rates bills are being
implemented, budget's already been passed.
Parliament's already committed the executive
to spending the money.
So if you're arguing for reductions in tax,
how do you fund what government is?
Uh, parliament is already authorized to be spent.
So that sort of led me to the, the report.
I apologize for the, the missing links
and references, um, tried to cut and,
and give you a little bit of a sense of that,
but that's broadly what was happening in the, the tax part
of my submission to this committee.
Um, related to that, I also made a submission
to the select committee on the regulation standards bill,
thinking about process
and also making sure that parliament is suitable
for our tarot New Zealand as we currently are,
rather than possibly 10, 20, 30 years ago.
Um, included in that,
and I'll, I'll push it out there was thinking about teti
as a upper house in for New Zealand in the sense
that TEI would give you a person
or group of persons thinking about the longer
term interests of New Zealand.
It wouldn't be necessarily a formal part of the process,
but engagement under the TEI would mean
that policy formulation would have that overview upfront.
So that's, uh, the second part of my comments
that how would you see that working?
Well, I think if you are engaged in, in the treaty process,
um, I, I don't, don't tend to go into debates as
to who has sovereignty or not.
I'm thinking you've got, um,
but if you are as an executive thinking about a, a policy
and you're thinking about how you engage with the other,
the treaty party
and you bring them to the table,
they typically will have a longer term view than electoral
concerns or an immediate answer.
So they bring that to the table, is part of what they do is,
uh, part of what they do.
So, um, possibly the, the last comment is
around engagement with submitters.
Um, I've, I try to make sure I, I give a submissions
that appropriate air time and,
and think about exactly what they're saying
and try to understand what they're saying.
That's not always clear.
But one thing you, you do do
and yet see is that submitters tend not
to take their submissions as read.
So effectively they will spend the five minutes, 10 minutes,
um, regurgitating
what they've already told you in their written submissions.
I hope I haven't done that today,
but I think, you know, invariably it's around the questions
that the committee can ask.
So thinking about how submitters can be educated to
how best to make this, I know I think the clerk does have
advice for submitters, um,
but whether that would be reiterated to say,
if you're gonna do an oral, give it a minute or two
and then you turn over the committee
and I let them ask questions.
Tha thank you. Good to see you second time today.
Um, actually, which kind of brings me onto a, a,
a question which you kind of,
or an idea which you just kind of touched on then.
Yeah. And actually with something like the, um,
annual taxation bill,
do you think we should provide more guidance on
what submitters should be submitting on?
And that's kind of what you just touched on.
Then there's a couple of examples actually
that in committees I've been involved in this term
where we actually put out more like a, a discussion document
or actually points that people, um, should comment.
Do you think, I mean, that wouldn't be appropriate
for every bill, but something like the annual tax rates bill
would be, because you could actually outline what the
specific more specifics are
to just give people more guidance.
I, I it's, it's very hard when you're,
you're technically in the topic.
Yeah. So the IR already publishes a bill commentary on the,
the annual rates bill,
but it tends to still assume a lot of knowledge.
And I think you were the, the public session today where one
of the submitters was thinking this was a
brand new piece of policy.
Mm-hmm. Um, as opposed to being a tweak to existing policy.
Mm-hmm. So there, there is the education around
how do you submit, but also what does the bill actually do?
Yeah. Um, you do have a problem
with technical bills trying to get that across.
Um, the, for some committees,
I'm not sure whether there's always an, I know I think the,
um, parliamentary library used to, uh, bills Digest and try
and re and, uh, summarize the bill for submitters,
but trying to think about, about that.
But also if committee members have particular questions,
I think that would be quite helpful.
Thanks very much for that.
Um, it's quite interesting that, not
specifically the bill you've mentioned,
but any requirement for a bill to be passed
by a certain period of time doesn't often follow
with a requirement that it be introduced a
certain period of time before that.
Mm-hmm. It opens it up to the possibility that it,
the passage of that bill can be politicized, introduced late
pressure put on Parliament to pass it, and
therefore avoid, uh, the, the, the scrutiny
that we'd all like to see.
In your view, do bills like the annual tax rate bill mm-hmm.
Warrant exclusion from the use of urgency
or instructions to committees to ensure that proper scrutiny
is applied to that, specifically given
that in legislation is required to be passed
by a per certain period of time?
I, I, I think that, um, both officials
and the executive are acutely aware of the timing
of the annual rates bill.
Um, I'm struggling to think of a time when
it wasn't introduced in time to be able to
but go to select committee
and return to parliament be passed by the end demand.
So typically you've got an introduction date in August
or September, and it's always managed to do that, to mature
that, that part of the legislation is, is, um, dust
through the scrutiny.
But one of the other legs of my, um,
regulatory standards bill submission was around the point
that Sir Jeffrey and John
and Boston were raising around caucus
and coalition agreements,
and what does that actually mean for the passage of,
of our particular bill.
So it's unlikely
that an annual rates bill will ever not be passed
because that goes to confidence and supply.
You know, the select committee with the majority government
mps is not going to say, don't pass this,
because that affects confidence and supply.
So there's a, a pragmatic question in there as one, as well
as one of principle that you've gotta think about both
of those pragmatically, you know, I I guess the,
it's not quite chicken little,
but the things are really failing.
If your annual rape bill is not, uh,
legislation is not passed in time.
That is true. Uh,
but my, what my focus is on around is ensuring
that the process that leads to the passage of debt
gives Parliament and the committees the appropriate time
to be able to scrutinize it If it was to be, uh,
additional tax, or equally, if taxes were to be reduced,
the consequences of either
of those options deserve adequate scrutiny.
Sure. But I, I think pragmatically that's,
that's in the budget, you know, the, by the, so say the,
the annual rates bill over the last two have confirmed rates
that are in the budget, which
Parliament is already approved.
So whether it needs that, it's unlikely
that the annual rate bill mechanism would,
would either increase or decrease taxes.
Thank you. Just to reinforce, uh,
Jeffrey's point about time, uh, conscious moving on, but Sue
and then, uh, uh, Joseph, you,
Um, very, very quickly, I just wanted
to talk briefly about the, um, volume of submissions
that can be received on certain bills,
particularly some contentious bills.
And even in my very brief time in this place, I've noticed
that it's changed form submissions in particular have
changed from being sort of emails
where the wording's identical,
but they're signed by a different person to now the use
of ai where you can have two or three sentences,
but each one's actually completely different.
And in your submission about talking about giving everyone,
even the ones that are considered, um, that are, um,
not deemed appropriate, are still considered then, um, how
that, how we work with that when you can be, we can be tens
and hundreds of thousands.
I I think from a a written submission perspective,
you can pick up the themes across those.
Um, I'm not, I don't discount it
because there are a hundred that look exactly the same,
for example, these are people who've taken the time
to submit to the committee
and say, here's what I think and why.
So you pick up the themes rather than necessarily, um,
you, you work with themes rather than the submitter per se.
Um, how you might do that. That's fair enough.
It's a secret. It is problematic.
So we had a situation earlier this year
where a bill attracted, um, a record number of submissions.
Sure, yeah. All of those submissions had to be considered
and they all formed part of a report.
But, uh, the, that report was compiled, uh,
largely after the event.
Mm-hmm. Simply because the, the exercise of going
through all those submissions was so vast, uh,
that the clerk's office just didn't have people to do it.
And I think it would be quite a concern if in fact,
submissions were assessed by ai, just put through a,
an AI sort of machinery that would be, that that is not the,
the heart of democracy in my opinion.
And I think, uh, so there is a real challenge for us
around how we deal with all this.
There is, and I, I think if you go back
to Jeffrey's question around exposure drafts might flush
some of that out so that you've got the themes
and you've got the ability of the executive to engage
on those policy matters.
Um, as a very quick side note,
if I can take an extra minute, um, if I, I did
for my sins, listened to, I think it was the committee
of the whole house on the emergency measures bill,
and watched MPS struggle with some
of the amendment paper technical elements of it.
And it, I, I suspect that was
because it was dropped on them on the day.
And they're trying to say, well, what does this do? Mm-hmm.
Am I for against it?
Um, thinking about the amendment paper process, should,
you know by, by the time the bill's been reported back,
presumably the executive have decided that
they're going to do it anyway.
So should it be a select committee to give some sort
of ability to, for MPS to get their heads around it
before they end up debating it.
But, you know, if you've only got 900 hours, um, you,
you would spend a bit more efficient.
Efficient, yeah. You, you, you might be able
to cut down some of the time it's closer to six.
I was being generous for extended setting and, and urgency.
It's not a lot. It's not Joseph.
Uh, thank, thank you for Speaking. Uh, thank, thank you
Teresa's submission. Just one,
one point I want, um, seek clarification on to
what you said earlier about another body, um,
and elected representatives, is
that your position at electoral representatives do
not take a long term view.
Um, I, I think the drivers are, are there
that they don't necessarily take a long-term view.
Um, I think, uh, you know,
an upper house is meant to do that.
It's meant to take a, a longer term view.
Um, so the,
you haven't actually got anybody checking whether
they take a long-term view,
Not to
Public apart, but, but again, that's a short term view.
Right. You know, that's a three year cycle.
Um, that's the, the public itself doesn't necessarily
take a long term view.
Alright. Thank you very much for your time.
We appreciate that. Thank you. Uh, call on David Agnew
in your hands,
Distinguished members of the committee.
Thank you for inviting me to speak with you today.
Um, my name is Dave Agnew
and I've spent a lot of my waking hours over the last six
years thinking about Parliament in one way or another
because I'm very interesting person.
Um, but I'll try and keep things brief
'cause I've only got, uh, five minutes.
Um, so I often say in conversation that the purpose
of select committee scrutiny is to ensure
that a bill becomes the best version of itself, right?
If it makes it to the
committee, it is probably going to pass.
Therefore, the committee's role is
to make it the best version of itself.
And that light, I urge the committee to embrace this review
of standing orders in the same light, uh, make sort
of ambitious change and make the standing orders the best
version, uh, of themselves.
My written submission, which, uh, will take as read, uh,
pertains a great bag of recommendations from sort of minor
and technical to significant,
but hopefully practical through to sort
of grand and aspirational.
Um, and they're all sum, uh, summarized
to paragraph nine if you wanna have a look at them.
Uh, but the underlying theme across most of them is
that Parliament needs to move with the time if it wants
to stay relevant and that it must stay relevant if it wants
to, um, if we expect our democracy to remain functional.
Mm-hmm. Um, as sort of Mr.
Ton referred to, uh, there often questions
and answers are more useful.
So I've got my prepared remarks, which I will dive into,
um, but interrupt me anytime.
Um, please, uh, I'd also like
to just note my support for Sir Jeffrey Palmer's, um,
submission and for Dr. David Wilson's submissions.
Uh, I think they're extremely, uh, sensible, considered
and should be taken into account, uh,
as much as possible.
So, alright, so in recent years, uh,
there's been a significant shift in
how people engage with Parliament.
Um, as noted in Dr.
Wilson's submission, um,
that engagement has increased significantly,
even while trust in Parliament as an institution declines.
I think the number he said was that
of the 1.3 million written submissions since 1996, 600,000
of them have been made in the last two years.
Which sort of staggering, which makes the issue, uh,
from my perspective that it's clear
that people want to engage with parliament.
They clearly want to have their say, um,
but they don't really have an opportunity to do this
outside of the select committee process.
Um, sort of as traversed in previous submissions,
there are a few exposure drafts,
there's limited consultation
before, uh, legislation hits the,
and that I think is a problem.
Uh, people have to finagle a square peg of sort
of like activism, activism, outrage, protest, campaigning,
as well as, uh, constructive criticism into the round hole
that is, uh, selecting scrutiny.
So the system seems to be increasingly, uh, incompatible
with how people are engaging.
Members don't have capacity.
Uh, the office of the clerk doesn't have the resources
and the public don't really have access to other avenues
with which they could, um, sort of better engage beyond, uh,
flooding the committee with outrage
or, you know, frustrations which are reasonable
but are impractical for a committee to deal with.
Um, so
broadly, I think, um, most of my recommendations
around this, uh, fall into the two categories of expanding
how people can interact with, uh, select committees
and supporting people to better understand, uh, the job
that a select committee is doing.
So the sort of load-bearing change that I would, uh,
recommend would be to introduce, um, the what is referred to
as the Toko model, um, to handle form submissions
and other sort of generic, uh, engagement.
Sorry. So what model, uh, Toko doing Toko,
um, you know, I agree.
Thumbs up. Uh, like,
and subscribe, whatever you want to sort of refer to it as.
Um, sort of a model that would allow organizations
and individuals to publish their substantive submission,
uh, to Parliament's website probably.
Um, and others could click a button, sign it with their name
and phone number
and email, uh, to express their support, like
how the e petition system works.
And in many ways, like how the sort
of generic form submissions process does work, uh,
at the moment, it just would
reduce the administrative burden rather than having, um,
dozens of, uh, select committee administration offices
sorting through hundreds
and thousands of submissions to click yes,
this is substantially the same as yes, this is, you know,
which takes quite a lot of time.
Um, it's all kind of already in that box.
Um, so at the same level of engagement, it's just, uh,
facilitated at the public's end.
It's easier for them to do it,
but it's also easier for the committee staff to do so.
And then it makes it easier on the, uh, committee members
to engage.
Um, I see a risk around that, of course,
in the people might sort of flinch away
and think that that's the committee trying to,
or sorry, parliament trying to reduce engagement, saying,
oh, well we're not going to listen to your
submissions, we're just gonna put it in a box.
So I think it would have to be paired with, um,
a substantial increase in the amount
of alternative engagement practices that are done.
And, um, ideally a dedicated committee
or team within the select committees, uh,
services be created to explicitly support, uh,
engagement with that committee.
Sorry, with the, with select committees as a whole.
Similar, we might move to questions, I think. Yeah.
Brilliant. Sorry for the sake. Thank you. Yeah.
And, um, thank you
for your submission and great recommendations.
I know your, your comments and Patsy questions,
but another comment that I think relates to
that is your suggestions on the speaker disincentivizing,
uh, comment, content free speeches in the house.
Um, how would you see that being enforced, um, in a way
that genuinely disincentivizes that, Uh, the,
I mean a lot of it comes down to speaker's discretion I
suppose, but, um, the, you know, there's the timekeeper
who keeps time.
Um, and Bell is rung every time a member gets
to a certain point in their speech.
Um, this is kind of the inverse of that.
Um, if a member stands up and says, uh, this is a great bill
and I commend it to the house, or This is awful
and I cannot commend it, um, the balance
of time is distributed among the other side of the house.
Um, the speaker in question time controls the
flow of supplementary questions.
It's a similar model. Mm, thank you.
It's simple, but it's,
there are possibly more elegant ways of doing it.
But that is what I would
Joseph, last question.
Thank, thank you. Um, just in interesting your talk talk,
um, thumbs up, thumbs down.
Um, this, so you interesting recommendation in terms of the,
I think a lot of campaigns are driving people towards, uh,
make submission select committees that will show support or
otherwise usually support, you know, against the bill.
Mm-hmm. Which tends to be the way it is.
So, so you, you're proposing something on the parliamentary
website that verifies identity, it gives people
to do I case support or otherwise,
and then something additional if they want
to make substantive submission.
Is that summarizing that?
Uh, not necessarily an additional, um, step.
The, the substantive submission would
process would remain the same.
This is just, if people wanted to make the form submission,
um, instead of doing that, they could just click the button.
Um, I wouldn't necessarily say it should be enforced.
I, I think it should be encouraged. Um,
Alright. Look, Dave, thank
you very much for your time.
Sorry to us that short. Not a problem.
We've now gotta go to, to zoom. Thank you. Thank you.
Um mm-hmm. Meetings. Thank you. So can we hook those up?
We'll try and get through these as, uh, speed. Liz, we can,
can you hear us?
Anna? You need to unmute. Unmute,
Right. Thank you.
And look, we've got, so we're running up against time a
little bit, but happy to hear from you. We're in your hats.
Okay, thank you. Uh, Koto.
So my, um, one page submission sets out two recommendations.
I'm happy to answer any questions you have.
Um, I thought it would be helpful
to reframe recommendation number two with reference
to the, um, submissions made
by the parliamentary council office.
Um, so recommendation
two, um, I said I recommend, shall I wait
until you can see the written version?
Mm-hmm. Yeah. Okay. Okay, got it. We're all good.
Okay, great. Thanks.
Um, so perhaps I'll start with, um,
the parliamentary council office has recommended
that Appendix C of the standing orders be updated
to require that private and local bills be
provided to the parliamentary council office
prior to introduction.
I think if that process had been in place, um, in relation
to the bill that resulted in the Auckland Harbor Board
and Tuna Borough Council Empowering Amendment Act
of 2025, um,
that bill probably would not have been introduced
to the house if there had been sufficient scrutiny,
um, when the bill was presented
to Auckland Council's governing body as item
13 on the 27th of April, 2023.
I'm happy to share the recording with your Secretariat team
during the first minute of that item.
Mayor Wayne Brown asked,
is the legislation meaning the 1923 Act?
That's stupid. And I think really what's hap happened here
is that the original purposes of the 1923 legislation
were not understood
or interpreted correctly in our 21st Century context,
um, before that bill was even thought of.
Um, so in my written submission, I go into the detail
of saying that I think that that
1923 Act should have been repealed
with the, um, transitional legislation that helped
to set up Auckland Council.
So there's quite a lot of detail in the background there,
but I think the key point is covered
by the parliamentary council officer's, um, submission.
And it also relates to the, um, PCOS submission to
clarify the powers of public bills relating
to private benefit, um,
because this was a scenario that originally related to land,
um, but there was some overlap with the private operations
of the boating club, um,
which has since been incorporated as a society
and registered as a charity.
So the whole context has changed.
The 1923 ACT is superfluous.
Uh, look, I think you make a an extremely good point
and I just wonder if we might get to comment on
how do we get to this point?
How did we get to this point? Yeah, I mean, if, if,
if you've got a So bar,
the t Peterborough Council disappeared 1989.
Mm-hmm. Um, and the Harbor Board went with it.
So how do we have legislation?
Were, were those le legislations saved in the, uh,
local government acts that, that, that, that are
those bodies or, I can't answer
That off the top of my head. All,
all I can say is
that the standings don't give the clerk the power check
whether legislation is needed or warranted
or not based certain parliament.
Right. Obviously after it's introduced, not before.
Right. But I can, I can come back
to you on the substantial reasons. I
Don't know that that might be quite useful.
'cause it seems to be like pretty straightforward sort
wouldn council office to, we should, uh, be the promot.
Anyone got any further questions?
No, I think it's a valid point. Yeah. Thank you. Made.
Alright, well look, um, thank you for that.
Uh, Anna, that's, uh, probably the most practical thing
that's been put in front of us today.
We're notwithstanding our other submitted.
Great. Thank you. And I will send that recording through.
Thank you very much about me,
Wayne Brown's coins. Okay, thank you.
Thanks a lot. Bye. Uh,
now we've got Will Dyer Dryer
submission somewhere.
I really struggling to look at where they all Oh wow.
The book. Yeah, I don't know how that Yeah,
I think we're gonna have to mark them or number them
or something, so we don't,
you don't drag you over all the time.
Okay. Thank you. Uh, good afternoon.
Uh, will, can you hear us?
Yes, I can. Can you hear me?
Yes, indeed. So look, we're in your hands.
Um, I'm just getting your submission dialed up for me
to put it again in front of me, but, uh, please speak away.
Wonderful. Thank you very much, Koto.
Um, it's great to be here. Thank you for having me.
I'm sorry I couldn't be there in person, but I'm now
living in sunny Darwin.
Um, I recently completed my doctorate, uh,
looking at the legislative scrutiny
of Parliamentary Select committees, um, INTA
and New Zealand, including quantitative analysis
of committee reports and interviews
with members and officials.
You have my, uh, submission in front of you.
Um, I have several recommendations.
I'm happy to chat with them about, um, with you about them.
Um, two things I do really want to highlight is, and,
and I've heard the sort of discussion that's been ongoing
before my submission is, um, the needs to change
how we're doing submissions.
I don't think that the submission process is currently
working for committees,
and I don't think it's working for,
for the public committees are not getting the learning
that they should be through,
particularly in these really high volume
submission, um, situations.
And I don't, um, as if the, the sort
of representative element is, is working all
that well, each e either.
Um, the other thing I wanted to highlight is that, um, my,
my fourth recommendation regarding, uh,
independent advisors being a sort
of institutionalized part of the committee process.
Um, I'm currently working as a senior research officer, um,
in the NT Parliament working for committees,
but I am working for committees.
I'm helping them understand legislation, um,
understand inquiries, um, providing them policy advice,
but I'm working for the committee rather than the committee
via the minister kind of.
Um, so happy to take any questions
and chat with you about my submission.
Thank you very much.
Yeah, look, thank you.
You, you basic, um,
points have been made earlier this afternoon as well.
There's a consistency in, in what you're recognizing is, uh,
areas we should, uh, we should be looking at.
Uh, we have questions from the, uh, Ricardo mid March,
Just on your re um, just on recommendation number four,
institutionalization of independent advisors, um,
as a strong believer that there may be a partisanship,
but not such thing as actually anyone being
politically truly neutral.
Um, what safeguards would you would like to put in place
to ensure that, um, there's a set of criteria
around competencies or
otherwise, um, to ensure that, um,
these advisors are not, I guess, um, chosen
by the majority of a committee, which often is also
the majority of who controls government?
Yeah, so that's a good question.
I mean, in terms of the way it works in other jurisdictions
is I am an employee of the Department
of the Legislative Assembly.
So just as the office of the clerk staff are employed
through a regular, you know, employment contract
and they're not beholden to the majority
of the committee in terms of their employment,
that you could do the same with a research officer.
Um, so rather than being appointed by a committee, um,
you could have a system where there are research officers
who work for committees that can be system
or potentially individual committees that are
with them all of the time.
And it's a part, it's their job
to help committees understand things, to do research,
to analyze submissions, to analyze departmental, um,
advice, things like that.
Thank you. Uh, Lawrence.
Hi, um, kilo. Well, thank you so much for your submission.
I have a question around, I think you, um, uh,
recommendation one around select proportionality
of, of committee chair.
I wondered particularly when it comes to bills, is, is
what you're suggesting, um, just the chair change,
but also the proportionality
of the membership on the chair as well?
Right. Just, that's my first kind of clarification question.
And I do have a follow up question.
So my recommendation is to establish, uh,
the chair positions as proportional
to representation in the house as
with the membership currently.
So, um, if, you know, a party had one in 10 members of,
of the house, they should have one in 10, um,
c committee chair positions.
Cool. Um, and my follow up questions, I guess
procedurally, you, you might find that the chair
and that the, the change in professionality will improve,
but how does that improve the overall legislative process
that if the select committee scrutinizes
and it comes into second reading, the government
or any governments, you have the majority,
that you have the executive
and they'll be like, well, we're not gonna
listen to the select committee.
How would you see that play out?
Yeah, well, I guess there are government response matters,
but the accountability itself, the process in which
a committee thoroughly scrutinizes
and airs, um, issues publicly, um, matters as well.
So if you have a, you know, a system
where there's majority government chairs
and they are, I'm not saying all government chairs do this,
but some do, you know, push things through on behalf
of the government as they're member
of the government support program, then you are reducing the
amount of accountability and screwing there.
If you have more, uh, cross bench
or opposition chairs, then that procedural power
that can be used to push things through more quickly, um,
will be, you know, distributed amongst, you know,
more, more party members.
And the frequency in which government members are able to,
to push things through will be lessened.
So that scrutiny process itself is valuable regardless
of what's happening in response in the second reading.
That's actually very helpful. Thanks.
Committee reports are public, the, you know,
these processes are often, um, reported on that, that
that all is a part of the web of screw speed.
Thank you. Okay. Final, uh, quick question from,
uh, Joseph Mooney.
Yeah, th thank you. And, um, I'll just as a sort
of follow on from what Ricardo asked in a way,
but from a different lens, uh,
because I think there's a motivation, uh, we from, um,
arguably for people in opposition
and groups aligned to them to, um, submit on bills
that they don't agree with.
Um, and so those research advisors that you talked about,
how do, would you see them managing the tension,
which there would be a inevitable difference of opinion
between government members
and opposition members about whether things are relevant
or the submissions are relevant
or not, to actually the machinery of the legislation
that's been considered by the committee?
Yeah, that, that, that, that's a good question.
And it, and it is tricky. Ultimately, the, um, work
that the advisors do here is subject
to the direction of the committee.
So asking for advice, um, you, you know, so if,
if the committee is asking me for advice that
that is a majority of the committee asking for advice, um,
often also the whole committee asking for advice
because they do want to interrogate, um, the substance
of, of what they're looking at.
Um, so there is going to always be that sort
of majority minority issue,
but I don't think that there's anything, you know,
government members of a committee want
to pass good legislation as well.
They want to understand things.
They want to get substantive policy advice, um, that
that enables them to do a better job of the stuff
that they are doing of the, of the work they're doing.
So even though the end results might be, uh, more aligned
with the government, still aligned
with executive governments, um, having research officers
who can help the committee, help government members
as well interrogate
and do better scrutiny in
that process is still still a good thing.
Um, and I think you will have, um,
differences in the end results.
It might not always be super large differences,
but you'll get differences from having
that extra source of advice.
That's the committee's advice rather than
departmental advice.
Will, thank you very much for your time this afternoon.
I appreciate the salient points that you've made
for us to consider.
Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you for having me.
Right. Environmental
and Conservation Organization of New Zealand Incorporated.
Zoom. Yeah, sorry. Yeah, thank you.
Good afternoon. And, uh, well good evening just about,
but, uh, thank you for making time available.
Um, we're in your hands,
Uh, Tato, um, Barry Weber.
I'm the chairperson
of the Environment Conservation Organizations Eco,
and with me is, um, Kath Wallace, who's the vice chair,
just, um, eco welcomes the opportunity to make a submission
and be heard for the parliamentary standing orders review.
For those who don't know us, eco's the National Alliance
of Groups with the concern for the environment.
We've been a ongoing ter on parliamentary on legislation
and other matters since we were established in the 1970s.
Eco makes numerous submissions annually on bills,
parliamentary inquiries,
submissions on international agreements, et cetera.
ECO has made submissions on past standing order reviews.
Um, we're concerned that laws
and policies are being implemented under this parliament
in too many cases under urgency without select committee
scrutiny, without the ability for the public
to make submissions and without the ability for parliament
to adequately scrutinize new laws or changes to law.
In our submission, we've made some suggestions
to limit urgency
or to require additional scrutiny of legislation
that's passed under urgency over time.
The recommendations we've proposed come in from an
experience in the process and
with the proposals from the eco exec and members,
and consider things that the review should consider.
Some of our proposals are technical and process changes,
and others are to enable select committees
to scrutinize policy and law proposed by the executive
eco acknowledges that some of the
proposals would involve additional parliamentary funding,
but we consider that this is crucial to,
for a robust parliamentary de democratic process.
Parliament is a small cost, and MPS
and select committees should have the resources
to carefully scrutinize the proposals of the executive.
New Zealand is committed
to a rules-based international order, so it's essential
that Parliament consider the impact
of international obligations of laws
and policies put forward by the executive.
We've made a number of, uh, suggestions
and comments in our submission about the way that, uh,
international obligations are considered under legislation
they're often not considered.
Um, there's a recent example of a piece
of legislation which has international implications,
which whether, which the select committee
has not considered those
or not considered those issues in their report back
to the to Parliament.
Um, this raises issues in terms of whether, um,
the issues will become part of, um,
controversy internationally.
Um, eco's raising these obligations, uh, as a matter
that we think that, um, this should be part
of the standing orders review process.
We've also suggested a range
of other considerations in terms
of looking at longer term issues, um,
longer term in inside briefings.
We've also made some suggestions about, um, the way
that daily order papers, uh,
don't include urgency legislation, for example.
Uh, they're not very useful daily order papers.
We would suggest they need to be updated in terms of
what they actually contain.
Um, I'll just pass over to Kath for some additional comments
and then we're happy to ask the questions.
Thanks,
Uh, Kira, and thank you so much for this opportunity.
It's highly valued.
Um, yeah, so I'm
in a previous life I was also a senior lecturer in public
policy and public economics.
Um, in one of, I mean,
I guess we are very struck
and no doubt everyone else has said this to you as well.
Parliament must, um, look
after the interests of citizens
and make sure that there are, um,
limits on the power of the executive and that mps
and obviously the, uh, officers of Parliament
need to make sure that people are citizens are getting a,
a fair deal in terms of having input
and knowledge about, um, legislation.
And we are really over the sort of
wham bam rush through.
Don't give people enough time.
Um, I know you've had lots of submissions on, um, various
of the issues we've, uh, covered,
but we did think we should, um,
look particularly at international law
and international obligations.
'cause what we've is that,
that many mps seem not particularly aware of some of the,
uh, provisions of international law and obligations,
and obviously to of Wang as well.
Um, and we need to be making sure
that our legislator is looking carefully at
what the international, uh, legal obligations are.
And we've made a number of proposals about that processes
for tabling and informing mps and officials
and ministers about major, um, international obligations
and also about international authoritative theoretical
decisions and opinions like those from the ICJ,
the International Court of Justice, the, um,
international criminal course, the International Tribunal
of Law of the Sea,
and, uh, the provisions of unclos,
the UN Conventional Law of the Sea.
And we suggest that there also be a system
of not only hearing from government agencies about
what they've done and so on, as in scrutiny week,
but also for, um, tabling of reports,
um, of the implementation of international obligations
and hard law and soft law
and how we are complying
with those international obligations.
I'll leave it there and, um, just open up for questions.
Um, but thank you.
Thank you. I was just looking at, um,
your recommendations under 39.
Um, there's, there's a, a great consistency in
what you're recommending from previous
submitters this afternoon,
but also, uh, I would just make the point that, um,
when it comes to those, uh, special debates
that you are calling for there, uh,
we have now provisioned in our standing orders for six
of those annually.
And if you think about, you know, parliament back, um,
and for all the parliaments, I was there before that.
Uh, international treaties never got debated.
It was just no time for them and no time was made for them.
So we have made some progress in that regard.
And I think the, um, other submissions
that you make about the availability
of material on the website is something
that the Clark's office will certainly take a look at.
Any other questions that, uh, might be needed or, or,
or want to be asked
Just, just in response?
One of the questions, um, one of the issues which in terms
of inter, inter international obligations is, for example,
the SL committee response on the BB
and j treaty, the Biodiversity on
National Jurisdiction Treaty.
It's been sitting on the standing orders, um,
for about six months now.
Um, it's an important international agreement has in inter
international, um, uh, it's consequences for New Zealand
and for our neighbors in the Pacific.
Many, some of our neighbors have already ratified the
treaty, uh, New Zealand hasn't.
Um, it's coming into force on the 17th of January next year.
Um, it seems to me to be a, a, a thing that, uh,
the Parliament should be de debating
because it is such an important treaty, which has, um, um,
important consequences and,
and it's important for New Zealand, um,
and our sort of interests, uh, globally.
So, um, that's a, that's a good example of one, which, um,
if you were looking at, um, scrutiny
and debates then that was one
that should have debate. Thanks.
Thanks that, uh, so there's two further debates in the
series of six this year prior to Christmas.
And, um, those opportunities are put
for the business committee by members.
Uh, so they're not controlled by the government,
which I think is a, a, an important thing.
So I'm sure that there members around the table who have,
uh, taken that, uh, that, uh, recommendation on board.
Thank You. One, one question, uh, Stuart Smith.
Yeah, thank you. Um, under your recommendations 39 al, um,
you're proposing
that any bill passed under urgency has a hundred
day sunset force.
I'm just wondering how you think
that would practically work?
Um,
What, what we've, what we're suggesting there is some way
of putting limits on the executive, and its,
and its, um, use of urgency within parliament
and allowing for select committees to have,
uh, greater scrutiny.
We realize that some things need to be passed in urgency.
There's taxation and other changes clearly that need
to be done in, in that way,
but it's, it's the overuse of urgency.
And what we're suggesting is some process
by which there are review and a hundred day,
and that's an arbitrary number,
but it's, it's, it's one way of looking at it that, um,
you would have a look at the legislation in that period has,
you know, was it, was it needed to be passed in agency?
Does it all have all the provisions? Was it review properly?
Do we have a report from the, um, ministry that's involved
or department that's involved in that, um, law, uh,
to tell us, um, you know, the provisions
with whether it fits all the things that should have done.
Um, so those are sort of things we're trying to suggest ways
of extra scrutiny, um, to avoid errors
and problems
and, um, which it inevitably happen with, um, legislation
that's passed under urgency.
Yeah. Look, I think you, you make good points.
One of the things that we're wrestling with is the, uh, need
for greater scrutiny of, of all legislation, uh,
versus the time
that's made available under our current
arrangements in the house.
And the, the, the parliament actually sits for, um,
if you include select committee time, uh, then it's
around 900 hours a year.
But if you look at just house time, it's,
well less than 600 hours, which is, um, you know,
about a quarter of a normal working life.
So we, we do have to pack an awful lot into,
uh, a short period of time.
And that's something that we're, we're obviously conscious
of and we're looking at these sort of submissions.
So thank you very much for your time this evening.
We appreciate it very much. Thank you both. Thank,
Thank you. Thank
you.